docs: ADR: Do not make prometheus part of the Istio service mesh (#758)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/contributor/arch/004-do-not-make-prometheus-part of-the-istio-service-mesh.md

# 4. Do not make Prometheus part of Istio service mesh

Date: 30.01.2024

## Status

Accepted

## Context

As outlined in [ADR 001: Trace/Metric Pipeline status based on OTel Collector metrics](./001-otel-collector-metric-based-pipeline-status.md), our objective is to utilize a managed Prometheus instance to reflect specific telemetry flow issues (such as backpressure, data loss, backend unavailability) in the status of a telemetry pipeline custom resource (CR).
To address the integration of Prometheus querying into the reconciliation loop, a [Proof of Concept was executed](./003-integrate-prometheus-with-telemetry-manager-using-alerting.md).

For the querying to be successful, the telemetry operator should be able to reach prometheus. Since operator is not in Istio service mesh we should make conscious decision if we should have Prometheus server part of Istio service mesh or not.

## Decision

> The Telemetry operator which queries metrics from Prometheus is not part of the service mesh. Making Prometheus part of the Istio service mesh would require having additional resources such as `permissive` Istio peer authentication policy. This would nullify the advantages brought in by the Istio service mesh.

Reviewer: why did you apply https://github.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/pull/758#discussion_r1470955340 in line 14, but not this suggestion for line 17? :D

> The Telemetry operator which queries metrics from Prometheus is not part of the service mesh. Making Prometheus part of the Istio service mesh would require having additional resources such as `permissive` Istio peer authentication policy. This would nullify the advantages brought in by the Istio service mesh.

Author: The telemetry operator is querying the Prometheus so I skipped this.I will apply these changes manually.

> # 4. Do not make Prometheus part of Istio service mesh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# 4. Do Not Make Prometheus Part of Istio Service Mesh
```
Title case for headlines

Reviewer 2: ADR #4 is taken, please take #5

To address the integration of Prometheus querying into the reconciliation loop, a [Proof of Concept was executed](./003-integrate-prometheus-with-telemetry-manager-using-alerting.md).

For the querying to be successful, the Telemetry Manager should be able to reach Prometheus. Because the Telemetry Manager is not in the Istio service mesh, we must decide whether we should have the Prometheus server as part of he Istio service mesh or not.

## Decision
The Telemetry manager which queries metrics from Prometheus is not part of the service mesh.

## Problem
When Prometheus is not part of Istio service mesh, it would cause metrics data to be transported unencrypted, thus the metrics could be counterfeited. This would mean that we get wrong information about the possible issue with observability components. The side effects could be following:
 - Customer gets wrongly notified because of false positives.

>  - Telemetry operator gets wrong decision about the scaling: like scaling down when scaling up is needed causing data loss

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Telemetry operator gets wrong decision about the scaling, like scaling down when scaling up is needed, thus causing data loss
```

## Argument 

> - The network policy which enables telemetry manager to accept data from a desired IP address in kubernetes cluster reduces the attack vector. It also increases the attack complexity as the attacker would need to have access to the underlying node to perform the attack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The network policy that enables Telemetry Manager to accept data from a desired IP address in Kubernetes cluster reduces the attack vector. It also increases the attack complexity, because the attacker would need to have access to the underlying node to perform the attack.
```

> - Making the prometheus part of the Istio service mesh would add a strong dependency to istio service mesh. In case of any issue in the Istio service mesh there will be no monitoring data from Prometheus available thus Status information and Scaling decisions would not be reliable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Making Prometheus part of the Istio service mesh would add a strong dependency to Istio service mesh. In case of any issue in the Istio service mesh, there will be no monitoring data from Prometheus available, thus status information and scaling decisions would not be reliable.
```

## Summary

> Based on above arguments of complex attack vector and unreachable monitoring information in case of problems with Istio service mesh, its decided prometheus not to be part of the Istio service mesh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on the arguments of complex attack vector and unreachable monitoring information in case of problems with Istio service mesh, it's decided that Prometheus will not to be part of the Istio service mesh.
```
